1586736 - Add Glean-iOS debug functionality (#409)
mozilla/glean: docs/user/debugging.md

# Debugging products using the Glean SDK

## Contents

1. [Debugging the Glean SDK in Android](#debugging-the-glean-sdk-in-android)
2. [Debugging the Glean SDK in iOS](#debugging-the-glean-sdk-in-ios)

### Important considerations when using Glean SDK debug tools

- Options that are set using the adb flags are not immediately reset and will persist until the application is closed or manually reset.

- There are a couple different ways in which to send pings using the Glean SDK debug tools.
    1. You can tag pings using the debug tools and trigger them manually using the UI.  This should always produce a ping with all required fields.

>     2. You can tag _and_ send pings using the debug tools.  This has the side effect of potentially sending a ping which does not include all fields because `sendPings` triggers pings to be sent before certain application behaviors can occur which would record that information.  For example, `duration` is not calculated or included in a baseline ping sent with `sendPing` because it forces the ping to be sent before the `duration` metric has been recorded.

Reviewer: Worth mentioning that it might not send the ping if it is empty

    3. You can trigger a command while the instrumented application is still running.  This is useful for toggling commands or for triggering pings that have schedules that are difficult to trigger manually.  This is especially useful if you need to trigger a ping submission after some activity within the application, such as with the metrics ping.

### Glean Log messages

> Glean logs warnings and errors through the platform specific logging frameworks.  See the platform specific instructions for information on how to view the logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Glean logs warnings and errors through the platform-specific logging frameworks.  See the platform-specific instructions for information on how to view the logs.
```

> **Note:** In previous versions of Glean the activity was available with the name `mozilla.components.service.glean.debug.GleanDebugActivity`.
>
> If you're debugging an old build, try running:
>
> ```shell
> adb shell am start -n org.mozilla.samples.glean/mozilla.components.service.glean.debug.GleanDebugActivity \
>   --ez logPings true \
>   --es sendPing metrics \
>   --es tagPings test-metrics-ping
> ```

> ### Important GleanDebugActivity notes

Reviewer 2: This part applies to both the ios and the android part, as it depicts the two different workflows and it's not specifically tied to Android.

[View Logs with Logcat]: https://developer.android.com/studio/debug/am-logcat

#### Command line

On the command line you can show all of the log output using:

```shell
adb logcat
```

This is the unfiltered output of all log messages.
You can match for `glean` using grep:

```shell
adb logcat | grep -i glean
```

A simple way to filter for only the application that is being debugged is by using [pidcat][], a wrapper around `adb`, which adds colors and proper filtering by application ID and log level.
Run it like this to filter for an application:

```shell
pidcat [applicationId]
```

In the above `[applicationId]` is the product's application id as defined in the manifest file and/or build script. For the Glean sample application, this is `org.mozilla.samples.glean` for a release build and `org.mozilla.samples.glean.debug` for a debug build.

[pidcat]: https://github.com/JakeWharton/pidcat

## Debugging the Glean SDK in iOS

> Unlike Android, we aren't able to export a View or similar to the `GleanDebugActivity` in Android that can process debugging commands.  Instead, iOS allows for implementation of a custom URL scheme _within the application_.  Instead of launching the application through a proxy like `GleanDebugActivity`, we can launch the application from a URL with the debugging commands embedded in the URL itself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
iOS allows for implementation of a custom URL scheme _within the application_, so that users can launch the application from a URL with the debugging commands embedded in the URL itself.
```

Reviewer 2: I'd personally like to keep the comparison between platforms out: in the log run, we might want a script for enabling consistent testing flows across platforms. See [this bug](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1568656)

Author: Not a problem, my first pass at this was more conversational and I had to go back and refactor it, this is an artifact of that.  I can remove the comparisons to Android functionality.

### Available commands and query format

There are 3 available commands that you can use with the Glean SDK debug tools

> - `logPings`: This is either true or false and will cause pings that are submitted to also be echoed to the device's log

Reviewer 2: What do you think of restructuring the doc a bit? One thing we could do is only report the options at the beginning of the page, before the platform specific bits. Then in each platform we could just add how these options translate to the platform specific way of working.

This doesn't need to happen as part of this PR. You can file a bug and take it after it if you want!

Author: [Bug filed](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1599804)

- `tagPings`: This command expects a string with upper and lower case letters, numbers and dashes, with a max length of 20 characters that will be used to tag the ping and cause it to appear in the Glean Debug View.
- `sendPing`: This command expects a string name of a ping to force immediate collection and submission of.

The structure of the custom URL uses the following format:

`<protocol>://glean?<command 1>=<paramter 1>&<command 2>=<parameter 2> ...`

Where:

> - `<protocol>` is the "Url Scheme" that has been added for your app (see Instrumenting the application below), such as `glean-sample-app`

Reviewer 2: Do we have any recommendation for the protocol? What if the application already has a protocol there? Can we use the existing protocol? If so, can you add that as a note?

Author: Most (if not all) of our iOS apps already implement a custom URL scheme like this based on the application name, so it is actually preferable to use the existing one.  We are really only adding a command processor to the existing mechanism, so it makes sense to recommend using an existing one.  Other than that, I don't know what other recommendations we could make here.

Reviewer 2: This makes sense to me! Let's call out that existing protocols can be used.

Author: I added this information to the beginning of the section that describes how to implement this in the app, stating that if the app already has a custom URL scheme, then you can skip to adding the `Glean.handleCustomUrl()` section.

You will be prompted to select a key from a drop-down menu, scroll down to and select `URL types`.  This creates an array item, which can be expanded by clicking the triangle disclosure icon.

Select `Item 0`, click on it and click the disclosure icon to expand it and show the `URL identifier` line.  Double-click the value field and fill in your identifier, typically the same as the bundle ID.

Right-click on `Item 0` and select `Add Row` from the context menu.  In the dropdown menu, select `URL Schemes` to add the item.

Click on the disclosure icon of `URL Schemes` to expand the item, double-click the value field of `Item 0` and key in the value for your application's custom scheme.  For instance, the Glean sample app uses `glean-sample-app`, which allows for custom URL's to be crafted using that as a protocol, for example: `glean-sample-app://glean?logPings=true`

#### Add the `Glean.handleCustomUrl()` convenience function and necessary overrides

In order to handle the incoming Glean SDK debug commands, it is necessary to implement the override in the application's `AppDelegate.swift` file:

```Swift

> func application(_: UIApplication,

Reviewer 2: I think it might be better to condense this with the one below.

                  open url: URL,
                  options _: [UIApplication.OpenURLOptionsKey: Any] = [:]) -> Bool
```

Within that function, you can make use of the convenience function provided in Glean `handleCustomUrl(url: URL)`.  An example of a simple implementation of this would look like this:

```Swift
func application(_: UIApplication,
                  open url: URL,
                  options _: [UIApplication.OpenURLOptionsKey: Any] = [:]) -> Bool {

>     // This does nothing if the url isn't meant for Glean.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // ...
    // This does nothing if the url isn't meant for Glean.
```

>     Glean.shared.handleCustomUrl(url: url)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Glean.shared.handleCustomUrl(url: url)
    // ...
```

Reviewer 2: This is just to hint that there _can_ be existing code there :)

Using the glean-sample-app as an example: to activate ping logging, tag the pings to go to the Glean Debug View, and force the `events` ping to be sent, enter the following URL in a web browser on the iOS device:

```shell
glean-sample-app://glean?logPings=true&tagPings=My-ping-tag&sendPing=events
```

This should cause iOS to prompt you with a dialog asking if you want to open the URL in the Glean Sample App, and if you select "Okay" then it will launch (or resume if it's already running) the application with the indicated commands and parameters and immediately force the collection and submission of the events ping.

> **Note:** This method does not work if the browser you are using to input the command is the same application you are attempting to pass the Glean debug commands to.  So, you couldn't use Firefox for iOS to trigger commands within Firefox for iOS.

It is also possible to encode the URL into a 2d barcode and launch the app via the camera app.  After scanning the encoded URL, the dialog prompting to launch the app should appear as if the URL were entered into the browser address bar.

#### Using the command line

> This method is useful for testing via the Simulator, which typically requires a Mac with Xcode installed, including the Xcode command line tools.  In order to perform the same command as above with using the browser to input the URL, you can use the following command in the command line terminal of the Mac:

Reviewer 2: Is there any way to _only_ install the command line tools needed to run this?

Author: Yes, you can install the command line tools but not the simulator, it requires a lot of stuff within Xcode and there is not an easy way to get it installed without Xcode.

```shell
xcrun simctl openurl booted "glean-sample-app://glean?logPings=true&tagPings=My-ping-tag&sendPing=events"
```

This will launch the simulator and again prompt the user with a dialog box asking if you want to open the URL in the Glean Sample App (or whichever app you are instrumenting and testing).

> #### Triggering commands if the app is already running

Reviewer 2: I think this paragraph can be safely removed if we restructure this document, since this applies to all platforms and it's outlining the workflows.

Run it like this to filter for an application:

```shell
pidcat [applicationId]
```

In the above `[applicationId]` is the product's application id as defined in the manifest file and/or build script. For the Glean sample application, this is `org.mozilla.samples.glean` for a release build and `org.mozilla.samples.glean.debug` for a debug build.

[pidcat]: https://github.com/JakeWharton/pidcat

## Debugging the Glean SDK in iOS

For debugging and validation purposes on iOS, Glean makes use of a custom URL scheme which is implemented _within the application_ that is consuming Glean.  Glean provides some convenience functions to facilitate this, but it's up to the consuming application to enable this functionality.  Applications that enable this Glean SDK feature will be able to launch the application from a URL with the Glean debug commands embedded in the URL itself.

### Available commands and query format

There are 3 available commands that you can use with the Glean SDK debug tools

- `logPings`: This is either true or false and will cause pings that are submitted to also be echoed to the device's log

> - `tagPings`: This command expects a string with upper and lower case letters, numbers and dashes, with a max length of 20 characters that will be used to tag the ping and cause it to appear in the Glean Debug View.

Reviewer: I would rephrase that to first tell what it does, then mention the restrictions.

```suggestion
- `tagPings`: This command will tag outgoing pings with the provided value, in order to identify them in the Glean Debug View. Tags need to be string with upper and lower case letters, numbers and dashes, with a max length of 20 characters.
```

- `sendPing`: This command expects a string name of a ping to force immediate collection and submission of.

The structure of the custom URL uses the following format:

`<protocol>://glean?<command 1>=<paramter 1>&<command 2>=<parameter 2> ...`

Where:

- `<protocol>` is the "Url Scheme" that has been added for your app (see Instrumenting the application below), such as `glean-sample-app`.
- This is followed by `://` and then `glean` which is required for the Glean SDK to recognize the command is meant for it to process.
- Following standard URL query format, the next character after `glean` is the `?` indicating the beginning of the query.
- This is followed by one or more queries in the form of `<command>=<parameter>`, where the command is one of the commands listed above, followed by an `=` and then the value or parameter to be used with the command.

There are a few things to consider when creating the custom URL:  

> - Invalid commands will trigger an error and be ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Invalid commands will log an error and be ignored.
```

> - Not all commands are requred to be encoded in the URL, you can mix and match the commands that you need.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Not all commands are required to be encoded in the URL, you can mix and match the commands that you need.  
```

> - Special characters should be properly URL encoded and escaped since this needs to represent a valid URL.

Reviewer: Afaik none of the commands should even accept anything outside of [a-zA-Z0-9-], thus not really needing encoding, right?

Author: I think ping names can contain underscores, but that's not usually a problem with URL encoding.  I'll remove this for now since we shouldn't allow characters that require encoding.

### Instrumenting the application for Glean debug functionality

In order to enable the debugging features in a Glean SDK consuming iOS application, it is necessary to add some information to the application's `Info.plist`, and add a line and possibly an override for a function in the `AppDelegate.swift`.

#### Register custom URL scheme in `Info.plist`

> If your application already has a custom URL scheme implemented, there is no need to implement a second scheme, you can simply use that and skip to the next section about adding the convenience method.  If the app doesn't have a custom URL scheme implemented, then you will need to perform the following instructions to register your app to recieve custom URLs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:** If your application already has a custom URL scheme implemented, there is no need to implement a second scheme, you can simply use that and skip to the next section about adding the convenience method.  If the app doesn't have a custom URL scheme implemented, then you will need to perform the following instructions to register your app to recieve custom URLs.
```

Reviewer 2: What do you think of the above? It will render as an "important" text box, to highlight it.

Select `Item 0`, click on it and click the disclosure icon to expand it and show the `URL identifier` line.  Double-click the value field and fill in your identifier, typically the same as the bundle ID.

Right-click on `Item 0` and select `Add Row` from the context menu.  In the dropdown menu, select `URL Schemes` to add the item.

Click on the disclosure icon of `URL Schemes` to expand the item, double-click the value field of `Item 0` and key in the value for your application's custom scheme.  For instance, the Glean sample app uses `glean-sample-app`, which allows for custom URL's to be crafted using that as a protocol, for example: `glean-sample-app://glean?logPings=true`

#### Add the `Glean.handleCustomUrl()` convenience function and necessary overrides

In order to handle the incoming Glean SDK debug commands, it is necessary to implement the override in the application's `AppDelegate.swift` file.  Within that function, you can make use of the convenience function provided in Glean `handleCustomUrl(url: URL)`.  

An example of a simple implementation of this would look like this:

```Swift
func application(_: UIApplication,
                  open url: URL,

>                   options _: [UIApplication.OpenURLOptionsKey: Any] = [:]) -> Bool {

Reviewer: nit. Should this be aligned with the above `_`?

### Invoking the Glean-iOS debug commands

Now that the app has the Glean SDK debug functionality enabled, there are a few ways in which we can invoke the debug commands.

#### Using a web browser

Perhaps the simplest way to invoke the Glean SDK debug functionality is to open a web browser and type/paste the custom URL into the address bar.  This is especially useful on an actual device because there isn't a good way to launch from the command line and process the URL for an actual device.

Using the glean-sample-app as an example: to activate ping logging, tag the pings to go to the Glean Debug View, and force the `events` ping to be sent, enter the following URL in a web browser on the iOS device:

```shell
glean-sample-app://glean?logPings=true&tagPings=My-ping-tag&sendPing=events
```

This should cause iOS to prompt you with a dialog asking if you want to open the URL in the Glean Sample App, and if you select "Okay" then it will launch (or resume if it's already running) the application with the indicated commands and parameters and immediately force the collection and submission of the events ping.

> > **Note:** This method does not work if the browser you are using to input the command is the same application you are attempting to pass the Glean debug commands to.  So, you couldn't use Firefox for iOS to trigger commands within Firefox for iOS.

Reviewer: Uh, interesting.

Author: Yeah, you can't pass yourself URL's to process, apparently :/

> It is also possible to encode the URL into a 2d barcode and launch the app via the camera app.  After scanning the encoded URL, the dialog prompting to launch the app should appear as if the URL were entered into the browser address bar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also possible to encode the URL into a 2D barcode or QR code and launch the app via the camera app.  After scanning the encoded URL, the dialog prompting to launch the app should appear as if the URL were entered into the browser address bar.
```
